.\" Written by Sébastien Millet
.\"
.TH zsbc 1 "version 0.2" "February 2016"

.SH NAME
.TP
zsbc \- an arbitrary precision calculator for cryptography

.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
\fBzsbc\fP [-n numeric_library] [\fIOPTIONS\fP]...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP
.B zsbc
zsbc is a calculator to do arithmetic with arbitrary big integers. One can define functions and manipulate arrays, all using bc language.
.br
By default it deals with relative integers. zsbc is equivalent to bc when used with \fBscale = 0\fP. zsbc stands for \fIz\fPero-\fIs\fPcale \fIbc\fP.
.TP
.B bc's mathlib
If started with option \fB-n bc\fP, zsbc uses bc numeric library, providing reals of arbitrary precision.
When started with \fB-n bc\fP, you can also provide \fB-l\fP option (same as bc), that'll load bc's math library functions.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-n,\ \-\-numlib
Select numeric library to use. Default is relative integers of the GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library (gmp). As of December 2015, possible values are
.br
.I gmp
.br
.I bc
.br
The "GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library" homepage is https://gmplib.org/
.TP
.B \-v\ \-\-version
Display version information and exit
.TP
.B \-V,\ \-\-verbose
Be more talkative
.TP
.B \-q,\ \-\-quiet
Be less talkative
.TP
.B \-l,\ \-\-mathlib
Load bc's math functions library. Can be used only with option \fB-n bc\fP as this option makes sense only wile using bc numeric library
.TP
.B \-t,\ \-\-liblist
Display numeric number libraries available and exit
.SH INITIALIZATION FILES
.TP
None
.SH LANGUAGE
.TP
zsbc language syntax is the one of bc with minor extensions, see below. You can find bc manual here:
.br
https://www.gnu.org/software/bc/manual/bc.html
.TP
.B zsbc specificities
Some instructions, functions and variables are specific to zsbc (they are not found in bc).
.TP
.RE
.I libswitch
Can be shortened as \fIlib\fP. With no argument, display the current numeric library. With a string (must be surrounded by "), defines the numeric library to switch to.
.TP
.RE
.I liblist
Display the list of available numeric libraries
.TP
.RE
.I symbols
Display the list of symbols (all variables, arrays and functions)
.TP
.RE
.I gmpversion()
Display the gmp numeric library version in the form of a simple integer - libgmp only
.TP
.RE
.I bcversion()
Display the bc numeric library version in the form of a simple integer - libbc only
.TP
.RE
.I check_functions()
Examine functions and display warnings if inconsistencies are found, like a call to a non-existent function, a wrong number or wrong type of argument in a function call, etc.
.br
Note this function is called at zsbc startup, after loading files listed in command-line arguments.
.TP
.RE
.I autoinvmod
Only when using the gmp numeric library.
.br
Default: 1
.br
When set to 1, a division inside a mod operation will be calculated as a \fBmodulo invert\fP. Otherwise a division is a euclidian division. See below for more details.
.TP
.RE
.I more
Default: 1
.br
When set to 1, use a built-in minimalistic pager remotely similar to the "more" program.
.TP
.B bc compatibility
zsbc is fully compatible with bc when started with option \fB-n bc\fP
.br
In this mode, it produces the exact same results as bc when running tests, including bc's mathlib functions (option \fI-l\fP)
.br
By default zsbc starts with gmp (the GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library) relative integers library. The language remains compatible with bc but the calculations are the same as bc only for bc used with \fBscale = 0\fP. Note besides the language (that is fully compatible), there can be some minor differences in the calculations conventions. For example gmp mod function will always return a positive integer, while bc keeps the sign of operand the mod is calculated of.
.TP
.B The scale variable
When used with the default \fIgmp\fP numeric library, zsbc is \fIscale-variable-agnostic\fP. A variable of name \fIscale\fP is just like any other variable and won't change zsbc behavior whatsoever.
.br
Conversely when used with \fIbc\fP numeric library, the \fIscale\fP variable defines the number of decimals of numbers.
.TP
.B Function argument passed by ref
.RS
GNU bc allows arrays to be passed by ref, as an extension to original bc. The syntax uses the star, example:
.nf
.RS
define calcavg(*t[], n) { ... }
.RE
.fi
zsbc extends this notation to simple variables, to be passed by ref. The syntax consists in prefixing the argument name with a star:
.nf
.RS
*varname
.RE
.fi
Example:
.nf
.RS
define void div2(*x) { x/=2 }
.RE
.fi
zsbc defines the notion of left-value as a particular case of expression, in the same way as C. To pass a variable by ref, you can use any expression so long as it is a valid left-value, as in
.nf
.RS
div2(x=10)
.RE
.fi
or
.nf
.RS
div2(myarray[++i])
.RE
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Modulo invert function
zsbc provides the \fBinvmod\fP function (with the default gmp numeric library). Calling \fIinvmod(a, b)\fP returns the invert of \fIa\fP modulo \fIb\fP. If it does not exist, it produces a \fINo modulo invert\fP error.
.TP
.B Automatic modulo invert calculation
.RS
zsbc provides the variable \fBautoinvmod\fP to automatically replace euclidian division by the calculation of the modulo invert.
.br
\fBIt is 1 by default.\fP
.br
When set to 1 (the only allowed non zero value), the division operation, if done in a context of modulo, will produce the modulo invert. Examples:
.nf
.RS
autoinvmod=0
1/4
.B 0
1/4%7
.B 0
autoinvmod=1 /* (default) */
1/4
.B 0
1/4%7
.B 2
.RE
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B Modulo power function
zsbc provides the \fBpowmod\fP function. Calling \fIpowmod(a, b, c)\fP returns \fIa\fP power \fIb\fP mod \fIc\fP.
.TP
.B Automatic modulo power calculation
.RS
When calculating a modulo'd expression, zsbc will use it to replace the regular pow function (\fB^\fP sign) with \fIpowmod\fP, allowing to calculate powers with a big exponent. Examples:
.nf
.RS
2^10^100%97
.B 61
.RE
.fi
The above is strictly equivalent to this expression:
.nf
.RS
powmod(2, 10^100, 97)
.B 61
.RE
.fi
The above will not work if splitting the expression in two parts:
.nf
.RS
a=2^10^100 /* Error: expression produces too big an integer */
a%97
.RE
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B ZSBC_ENV_ARGS
Can contain any option normally provided at zsbc invocation
.TP
.B ZSBC_LINE_LENGTH
Maximum line length in output. If a number to print is bigger, cut line with a \fB'\\'\fP character followed by a newline.
.br
If the variable is not set, take a default value of 0
.br
A zero value (or if variable is not set) means no line cut
.TP
.RS
.B ZSBC_LINE_LENGTH default
If ZSBC_LINE_LENGTH doesn't exist and by default (with gmp numeric library), zsbc will take 0 as default value => no line cut
.br
If ZSBC_LINE_LENGTH doesn't exist and zsbc is running with bc numeric library (option \fB-n bc\fP), zsbc will take 70 as default value => same as bc
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
\fIbc\fP(1)
.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Written by Sébastien Millet <milletseb@laposte.net>
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
.TP
.B bc
zsbc re-uses bc language and if started with option \fB-n bc\fP, it passes the same tests as bc and in real life situations it'll produce the exact same results. On the other hand zsbc is not meant as a substitute or fork of bc. zsbc uses code of its own except bc numeric library (taken as is) and some interface functions, to work with bc numeric library, that got copied over.
.br
.br
The file \fIFAQ\fP provided with zsbc source gives details about the code take aways found in zsbc, copied from bc source.
.br
It also goes in depth about the hack implemented to manage \fIibase\fP as if taken into account at execution time, to reflect bc behavior. Indeed zsbc does not convert strings to numeric objects at execution time, it performs this conversion at function definition time, once and for all.
.RE
